In 2004, Tatarinov interpreted the behavior of Viatkogorgon based on its skeletal features, which, while being generally similar to those of other gorgonopsians, had certain features that are unique or poorly understood. These concerned features of the locomotor apparatus in particular, which indicated a stage of swimming adaptations, while other features were consistent with those commonly seen in its group. Like other gorgonopsians, it had a long lumbar region of the vertebrae, of which the hindmost vertebrae showed an increased capability for vertical curvature, which was also the case for the neck vertebrae and, unusually, the hind part of the tail region.[4]
The presence of well-developed gastralia was one of its most unusual f
eatures among theriodonts, as were the hypapophyses of the tail region. In addition, the broad and somewhat shortened foot with unusual intermetatarsal contacts, which restricted the mobility of its individual digits, indicated transformation of the foot into a flipper-like structure. Tatarinov hypothesized these features to be adaptations for swimming; while Viatkogorgon was not a specialized aquatic predator, Tatarinov suggested its tail and feet enabled it to swim better than most other gorgonopsians. In particular, he thought the hind part of the tail was probably used for swimming, as is the case with reptiles with long tails that have hypapohyses, like Mosasaurus. Tatarinov noted that since the claw on the hindlimb's fifth digit was hooked and somewhat lengthened, it could have been used for protection and grooming, as in modern monotremes. The first digit could have had this function to a lesser degree, as it was free from contacting foot bones. The forelimb of Viatkogorgon was less specialized and could have performed more universal functions, as it lacked contacts between the digits.[4]
Antón stated in 2013 that while the post-cranial skeletons of gorgonopsians were basically reptilian, their stance was far more upright than in more primitive synapsids, like pelycosaurs, which were more sprawling. Regular locomotion of gorgonopsians would have been similar to the "high walks" seen in crocodilians, wherein the belly is carried above the ground, with the feet pointing forwards, and the limbs carried under the trunk instead of to the sides. The forelimbs had a more horizontal posture than the hindlimbs, with the elbows pointing outwards during movement, but the gait of the hindlimbs would have resembled that of mammals. As in reptiles, the tail muscles (such as the caudofemoralis) were important in flexion of the hindlimb, whereas the tails of mammals are merely for balance. Their feet were probably plantigrade (where the soles were placed flat on the ground), though they were likely more swift and agile than their prey. Their feet were more symmetrical compared to the reptilian condition,
making contact with the ground more efficient, similar to running mammals.[14]
is a species of bird in the family Calyptomenidae. It is endemic to mountain ranges of north-central Borneo, where it mainly inhabits montane forests and forest edges at elevations of 900–1,700 m (3,000–5,600 ft). It is 24–27 cm (9.4–10.6 in) long, with males weighing 142–171 g (5.0–6.0 oz) and females weighing 150–163 g (5.3–5.7 oz). Males are vivid green and have a black throat patch, black spots on the ear-coverts and back of the neck, and black markings and streaking all over the body. The tails and flight feathers are also blackish. Females are smaller and lack the black markings on the head and underparts. Juveniles look similar to adults but have fewer black markings.
Described by the British ornithologist Richard Bowdler Sharpe in 1887,
Whitehead's broadbill is named after the British explorer John Whitehead. It mainly feeds on fruit and supplements its diet with insects. Breeding probably occurs from March to June, with clutches containing one or two eggs. Although it is classified as being of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, it is threatened by habitat destruction and its population is thought to be decreasing.
Whitehead's broadbill was described as Calyptomena whiteheadi by the British naturalist Richard Bowdler Sharpe in 1887 based on specimens from Mount Kinabalu, Borneo.[2] The name of the genus, Calyptomena, is from the Ancient Greek words kaluptos, meaning covered, and mēnē, meaning moon. The specific name, whiteheadi, is in honour of the British explorer John Whitehead,[3] who collected the specimens based on which the species was described.[4] Whitehead's broadbill is the official common name designated by the International Ornithologists' Union.[5] Other names for the species include Whitehead's green broadbill, black-throated broadbill, and black-throated green broadbill.[6]
Whitehead's broadbill is one of three species in the genus Calyptomena, a genus of three bright green broadbills found in Southeast Asia. Calyptomena is one of two genera in the family Calyptomenidae, the other being Smithornis, a genus of three rather dull-coloured species found in Africa. Although species-level relationships within the family are unclear, both the genera are monophyletic (including all descendants of a common ancestor) taxa that are sister (most closely related) to each other.
The largest species in the genus Calyptomena, Whitehead's broadbill is 24–27 cm (9.4–10.6 in) long, with males weighing 142–171 g (5.0–6.0 oz) and females weighing 150–163 g (5.3–5.7 oz). Males are vivid green, with some black on the top of the head, black spots on the ear-coverts and back of the neck, and a large black patch on the lower throat and upper breast. They also have extensive black markings on the wings and upper back, conspicuous streaking on the underparts, and blackish tails and flight feathers. The iris is dark brown, the feet are olive to greyish-green, and the bill is black with a pale lower mandible. The forehead has a large tuft of feathers that nearly covers the bill. Females are smaller than males, with a smaller forehead tuft, no black marking on the head, and duller green underparts that lack black streaking. Juveniles are similar to adults but have fewer black markings.[8]
Whitehead's broadbill can be told apart from the other species in its genus by its larger size, black throat, and more extensive black markings on the body